Add Trino 401 release notes (#14675)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-401.md

# Release 401 (19 Oct 2022)

## General

* Add support for using path-style access for all requests to S3 when using
  fault-tolerant execution with exchange spooling. This can be enabled with the
  `exchange.s3.path-style-access` configuration property. ({issue}`14655`)
* Add output buffer utilization distribution to `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`14596`)
* Add operator blocked time distribution to `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`14640`)

## Delta Lake connector

> * Add support for writing to tables using [version 4 of the writer](https://docs.delta.io/latest/versioning.html#features-by-protocol-version).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for writing to tables with [Delta Laker writer protocol version 4](https://docs.delta.io/latest/versioning.html#features-by-protocol-version).
```

  This does not yet include support for [change data feeds](https://docs.delta.io/2.0.0/delta-change-data-feed.html)
  or generated columns. ({issue}`14573 `)

> * Fix bug where executing a `COMMENT` or `ALTER TABLE ... ADD COLUMN` statement

Reviewer 2: What does it mean to "change the writer and reader versions"?

Reviewer 3: Previously, the connector overwrites `delta.minReaderVersion` and `delta.minWriterVersion` table properties with `1` and `2`.

> * Fix bug where executing a `COMMENT` or `ALTER TABLE ... ADD COLUMN` statement

Reviewer: Maybe 

* Avoid changing reader and writer version table properties as unrelated side effect of adding comments.

Reviewer: fair .. sorry .. I misread.. .. leave the statements then..

  would change the reader and writer versions. ({issue}`14611`)

> * Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the Glue

Reviewer 2: Second "Glue" is redundant. It's implied by the first part of the sentence.

  tables has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Hive connector

> * Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the Glue

Reviewer: remove second "Glue"

  tables has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Iceberg connector

* Improve performance of the `remove_orphan_files` table procedure. ({issue}`13691`)
* Fix query failure when analyzing a table containing a column with a
  non-lowercase name. ({issue}`14583`)

> * Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the Glue

Reviewer: second "Glue"

  tables has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Kafka connector

> * Add support for configuring the prefix for internal column names using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for configuring the prefix for internal column names with the
```

  `kafka.internal-column-prefix` catalog configuration property. The default

>   value is `_` to maintain current behavior. ({issue}`14224`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  value is `_`. ({issue}`14224`)
```

Author: I'm not sure this is an improvement, I'd rather provide the context that you don't need to change it and current behavior is unchanged.

## MongoDB connector

> * Add `query` table function for query pass-through to the connector. ({issue}`14535`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the `query` table function for query pass-through to the database. ({issue}`14535`)
```

Author: I'm going to leave this as-is for consistency, we've done the release note this way for all of the other `query` functions that have been added.

# Release 401 (26 Oct 2022)

## General

* Add support for using path-style access for all requests to S3 when using
  fault-tolerant execution with exchange spooling. This can be enabled with the
  `exchange.s3.path-style-access` configuration property. ({issue}`14655`)

> * Add support for polymorphic table functions in file-based access control. ({issue}`13713`)

Reviewer 2: I would just say "table functions".

> * Add distribution data for output buffer utilization to

Reviewer 2: > Add output buffer utilization distribution to ...

  `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`14596`)

> * Add distribution data for operator blocked time to `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`14640`)

Reviewer 2: > Add operator blocked time distribution ...

> * Improve performance and reliability of `INSERT`, `MERGE`, and table optimization. ({issue}`14553`)

Reviewer 2: What's "table optimization" ?

* Fix query failure caused by a
  `com.google.common.base.VerifyException: cannot unset noMoreSplits` error. ({issue`14668`})
* Fix underestimation of CPU usage and scheduled time statistics for the build
  side of joins in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. ({issue}`14572`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for writing to tables with [Delta Laker writer protocol version 4](https://docs.delta.io/latest/versioning.html#features-by-protocol-version).
  This does not yet include support for [change data feeds](https://docs.delta.io/2.0.0/delta-change-data-feed.html)
  or generated columns. ({issue}`14573 `)
* Add support for writes on Google Cloud Storage. ({issue}`12264`)

> * Fix bug where executing a `COMMENT` or `ALTER TABLE ... ADD COLUMN` statement

Reviewer 2: > Avoid overwriting the reader and writer versions when executing a `COMMENT` or `ALTER TABLE ... ADD COLUMN`

  would overwrite the reader and writer versions. ({issue}`14611`)
* Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the tables
  has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for [IBM Cloud Object Storage](#hive-cos). ({issue}`14625`)
* Allow creating tables with an Avro schema literal using the new table property
  `avro_schema_literal`. ({issue}`14426`)
* Fix potential query failure or incorrect results when reading from a table
  with the `avro.schema.literal` Hive table property set. ({issue}`14426`)
* Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the tables
  has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Iceberg connector

* Improve performance of the `remove_orphan_files` table procedure. ({issue}`13691`)

> * Fix query failure when analyzing a table containing a column with a

Reviewer 2: > ... a table *that contains* a column

  `avro_schema_literal`. ({issue}`14426`)
* Fix potential query failure or incorrect results when reading from a table
  with the `avro.schema.literal` Hive table property set. ({issue}`14426`)
* Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the tables
  has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Iceberg connector

* Improve performance of the `remove_orphan_files` table procedure. ({issue}`13691`)
* Fix query failure when analyzing a table that contains a column with a
  non-lowercase name. ({issue}`14583`)
* Fix failure when listing tables from the Glue metastore and one of the tables
  has no properties. ({issue}`14577`)

## Kafka connector

* Add support for configuring the prefix for internal column names with the
  `kafka.internal-column-prefix` catalog configuration property. The default
  value is `_` to maintain current behavior. ({issue}`14224`)

## MongoDB connector

* Add `query` table function for query pass-through to the connector. ({issue}`14535`)

## MySQL connector

* Add support for writes when [fault-tolerant
  execution](#fault-tolerant-execution) is enabled. ({issue}`14445`)

## Pinot connector

> * Fix failure when executing a `SHOW CREATE TABLE` statement. ({issue}`14071`)

Reviewer 2: > ... when executing `SHOW CREATE TABLE`.

* Add support for using path-style access for all requests to S3 when using
  fault-tolerant execution with exchange spooling. This can be enabled with the
  `exchange.s3.path-style-access` configuration property. ({issue}`14655`)
* Add support for polymorphic table functions in file-based access control. ({issue}`13713`)
* Add distribution data for output buffer utilization to
  `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`14596`)
* Add distribution data for operator blocked time to `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`14640`)
* Improve performance and reliability of `INSERT`, `MERGE`, and table optimization. ({issue}`14553`)
* Fix query failure caused by a
  `com.google.common.base.VerifyException: cannot unset noMoreSplits` error. ({issue`14668`})

> * Fix underestimation of CPU usage and scheduled time statistics for the build

Reviewer: Maybe 

Correct estimation of

Author: I'd rather leave it as-is. I don't think that's really any clearer, and this maintains the pattern of using 'fix' as the first word to describe fixes.

Reviewer: fine by me

Reviewer 2: "the build side" is a term of art that most people won't understand. I would simplify to "for joins"

  side of joins in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. ({issue}`14572`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Add support for writing to tables with [Delta Laker writer protocol version 4](https://docs.delta.io/latest/versioning.html#features-by-protocol-version).
  This does not yet include support for [change data feeds](https://docs.delta.io/2.0.0/delta-change-data-feed.html)
  or generated columns. ({issue}`14573 `)
* Add support for writes on Google Cloud Storage. ({issue}`12264`)

> * Add support for DML statements on tables backed by GCS

Reviewer: DML ?? might have to detail that.. also GCS .. maybe spell out again or add in line above

Author: The line above was the fix for it, I just forgot to delete. 😆

* Add `query` table function for query pass-through to the connector. ({issue}`14535`)

## MySQL connector

* Add support for [fault-tolerant execution](#fault-tolerant-execution). ({issue}`14445`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Add support for [fault-tolerant execution](#fault-tolerant-execution). ({issue}`14445`)

## SQL Server connector

> * Add support for writes when [fault-tolerant

Reviewer: Why is this different from the two above?
